Now we are going to look at the techniques of taking creative decisions or the techniques of creativity.
In general, for most tasks that managers solve in their everyday life, special creativity is not required.
Most often they use knowledge, skills, intuition, and with their help ideally achieve the desired result.
However, in times of rapid, rapid changes and very tough competition, managers can rely less and less on standard solutions, which are sometimes also called routine solutions,
and often it is necessary to find a new solution in an unusual way.
Creative solutions are called solutions found in an unusual way, but nevertheless, they meet the same requirements as standard solutions.
But the ability to find such solutions is called creativity.
And we are going to look at the techniques that help in finding these creative solutions.
But before we move on to the techniques, let's see what are the main characteristics of a creative idea.
The first requirement or the first characteristic says that this idea should be outside of the usual, thoughtful, so-called paths.
Moreover, it should not be isolated, it should be connected with routine, usual, traditional thinking.
And most importantly, it should work, that is, bring a fruitful result.
Unfortunately, it is inevitable that a good creative solution, most often realized in a new product, in a new service, in a new, improved process,
very quickly turns into a routine, because a very large number of successors appear.
An example of this is the appearance of black crackers, three crusts, not so long ago.
The idea is simple, and at the same time it turned out to be so profitable that the market was instantly overflowing with all kinds of crackers,
black, salty, with garlic, and so on.
But the very development of this creative idea is a very difficult task.
Of course, some of the managers can visit a brilliant idea and it will come to life.
But most often, the development of new ideas is done professionally.
For this purpose, large organizations have a whole staff of specialists,
who can be allocated to separate departments, which are called, in different organizations, can be called in different ways,
this is a design office, and, if we speak English, what is called Research and Development, that is, the department of development of a new product.
And in order to systematize the work on the development of creative new solutions,
today, three methods are used most widely, which are called six thinking hats, proposed by Edward de Bono,
three thinking chairs, which were created by Walt Disney, and the method of synecdoche.
We are now proceeding to their consideration.
Six thinking chairs were proposed by Edward de Bono, and are very closely related to the techniques of imagination.
The method can be used to study the prospects of development of a complex situation or problem, which requires comprehensive consideration.
This technique helps to think over the problem from different points of view,
since each so-called hat, or rather a person sitting in this hat has his own view of things.
The view is fixed behind each hat.
Hats can be replaced with some other distinguishing features,
these can be on the sleeve, these can be cards, but they must be of the same colors,
white, red, black, yellow, green and blue.
But those who have already played this game, have used this method, say that hats are better, there is nothing.
And another undoubted advantage of this technique is that it can be used to make individual decisions.
In this case, a person will sit in turn in each of these hats,
and you can work in a group, then each of the participants will have at a certain time one or another hat.
What do hats mean and what are their prescribed points of view?
An observer, an expert, usually puts on a white hat.
He must always take a neutral position and focus on the available information and objective facts.
But a red hat is a sensual hat, the emphasis is on emotions, feelings, intuition, judgment, premonition, and so on.
It presents its views without explanations and evidence.
That is, a person sitting in a red hat can say anything that comes to his mind.
A black hat is intended to be a ruthless judge, dressed in a black mantle, strict, and may even be slightly biased to judge what others say.
The emphasis is on criticism and doubt.
As a rule, a person sitting in a black hat should express, justify his logically negative view of things.
A person sitting in a yellow hat should express a logically positive, optimistic view of things.
It should find advantages, benefits, highlight the good points in the idea that others express.
A green hat should focus on creative thinking, build hypotheses, make assumptions, express hypotheses, generate new ideas.
And finally, a blue hat.
In principle, it is also better to sit in a blue hat to an observer, an expert.
A blue hat is intended to be a cold-blooded and detached position.
This hat, or rather, a person sitting in a blue hat should be able to generalize everything that has been said.
The person's responsibility includes the control of processes, sequence of speeches of other hats, recording of their thoughts.
He controls the chairman, the organizer.
And, in fact, he is supposed to think about the thoughts that were spoken out loud during the conversation.
And after one round, in principle, all participants in this game should change hats.
The question arises, in what order can and should hats be changed?
In principle, you can work in the order in which we have just listed them.
And you can choose hats randomly, for example, by pulling out a card from a stack of these cards.
But it is very important to decide how the hat change or hat transition will take place before the game starts.
And one more point.
Since we have a black hat, a critic, a judge,
it is quite reasonable to introduce a black hat not too early, so that it, so to speak, does not cut a good idea,
does not give the opportunity to doubt those who would like to speak in an extraordinary way.
If, as I have already said, one person can sit in hats and mentally represent himself in different roles,
then in the group each of the participants changes one or another hat as one round goes on.
The main advantage of this method is that people are more open-minded.
When they put on a hat, they know that they must express a critical point of view, a fantasy point of view, and so on.
That is, it removes some tension and very often a conflict,
allowing people to express deep personal thoughts, considerations, sometimes just crazy to express ideas, and so on.
And it is more convenient for them to defend these ideas, because they do not defend their ideas, but the ideas that belong to the mental hat.
The mental hats have a very big advantage, and this method can be used quite widely.
In the textbook you have written a little more about the sequence, about the procedure of this method.
It is not as simple as it seems, because it is quite difficult to switch to another way of thinking,
but nevertheless this method is very, very productive when set correctly.
The next method is called the three-way mental chair.
It is somewhat similar to the previous method.
It was developed by Walt Disney, a very restless person, very creative.
At first he used this method for himself personally.
And in order to develop something, he initially imagined himself in different roles,
while moving to different rooms, then the room shrank to the size of a chair,
and in principle, then, from the attachment to a place, to a chair, Walt Disney switched to thinking,
imagining himself as if sitting on a chair, a dreamer, a realist or a critic.
The strategy of this method is that in your thoughts you need to consistently proceed from different positions,
to connect these positions better with certain places in order to consolidate.
For a beginner to work with this method, it may be useful to use Walt Disney's method.
For a dreamer to sit on a chair in one setting,
to switch to a chair of a realist, to move to another room, to another setting, and so on.
And with the development of the skill, it will be possible to stay on the same chair,
but to imagine yourself in different roles.
In the same way as with hats, it is necessary to note that there are certain recommendations
on when and where and who to be.
So, to finish work on the project, you need to be realistic, if possible.
A dreamer's chair. What should a person who has become a dreamer do?
He should invent the most fantastic things, play with various possibilities,
and best of all, with some impossibilities, something out of the realm of what is not real enough today.
He is allowed to turn everything upside down, to say absurd things, and to combine, at first glance, the incompatible.
In principle, you can do everything, but you don't need to think about your problem seriously.
You need to play, you need to juggle your thoughts, and so on.
In principle, for a beginner and for working in a group, it is better to write down your ideas and ideas on paper.
If you work alone, then on paper, and if the methodology works in a group,
then, in principle, it is possible to use sound recording techniques.
A realistic chair.
In this place, a person should include his common sense,
but it is necessary to develop, to understand, maybe to land in something,
the crazy ideas of a dreamer, and thereby try to find new rational solutions.
You need to move forward very planarly and reasonably.
To do this, it is desirable to choose a short and purposeful path.
A person sitting on a realistic chair should be pragmatic.
And finally, a critic's chair.
The duty of a person who has become a critic is to subject all previously expressed ideas of merciless criticism,
asking himself all kinds of questions.
Is there anything in these ideas at all?
Can they be used, taking into account the current day, the level of science and technology development, and so on?
Are they worth it? Will the consumer notice them? And so on.
In principle, the methodology of three thinking chairs, as well as the methodology of thinking hats, can work in a group.
And in both cases, if the work takes place in a group, even if individually,
the duration of the game should not exceed two hours.
The strong and weak sides of these two methods.
The first strong side is that they allow you to distance yourself from the problem.
They cover many points of view, especially if the lesson is held in a group.
And they help to relieve, as I said, tension, especially in thinking hats during group games.
But these methods also have weak sides of a certain kind of limitation.
First of all, the weak side is that it is quite difficult for a person to leave the traditional, let's say, the patterned, usual way of thinking.
And making a decision without a certain training of using these methods, they can be quite close to the traditional way.
And another relatively weak side, which is quickly overcome, is that at first these methods are perceived as something artificial.
But as people master these methods, their effectiveness is significantly increased.
The next method is called the method of synaptics, or the unification of various objects.
Synaptics is a complex method of stimulating creative activity, which uses principles and techniques,
such as the brain storm, which you learned in the previous course on making decisions, and the method of analogy and association.
The method of synaptics was introduced by Gordon in the 1950s to overcome the orthodox way of thinking,
to go beyond the traditional ways and methods of solving problems.
The principle of this method is that the spontaneous activity of the human brain is oriented to the study and solution of a problem in a specially selected group of people by using analogies.
I would like to emphasize that the group of people in this case is specially selected.
These are specialists in different areas of activity.
What is the strategy of this method?
In addition to the fact that the group of specialists of different professions is looking for a solution,
the second specific feature is that the members of the synaptic group do not know the essence of the problem before starting work.
Only some part of the existing problem can be known to them.
Of course, the head knows everything.
And according to the procedure, the game or meeting of the synaptic group usually begins not with the formulation of the problem as a whole,
but with the discussion of its separate aspects, the aspects intended by the head.
That is, we first discuss the elements as a whole, and then make a synthesis and generalization.
According to the procedure, first, the participants present to themselves the discussed problem,
and all, including the expert, offer their own options for its definition.
The head must record all this and present it for general review.
Thus, each of the participants in the meeting becomes, as it were, the author, the owner of the formulation of the problem,
and he usually has a desire to defend his formulation, promote the solution in his own way, and so on.
That is, he becomes an interested person.
The next step, if you will, is that it is necessary to clear everything that is proposed from completely obvious solutions.
After all, we are talking about creating a creative solution.
And then you need to turn the unusual into the usual, that is, to find analogies that will allow to express the given problem in terms that are well understood by all members of the synaptic group.
At the next stage, the main difficulties and problems that prevent the solution of the problem are determined.
And then the chairman, asking the guiding questions, offers to give a solution using one of the types of analogies.
There are four types of analogies.
Direct, subjective, symbolic and fantastic.
In the case of direct analogies, relative objects are compared.
They provide a useful result for complex systems provided that the parameters of the desired problem are adequate to the parameters of the analog.
Subjective or personal analogies provide for the mental reincarnation of the participant.
It is necessary to imagine yourself as an object of analysis.
In your textbook, there is an example that in the confectionery industry a large number of walnuts is required, which is very difficult to clean.
The core of walnuts is to be cleaned.
In order to get them, someone imagined himself as a walnut and imagined how he would tear this shell.
So the idea appeared to break walnuts with pumped compressed air.
There are a number of examples.
In the case of symbolic analogies, poetic metaphors and comparisons are used, in which the characteristics of a given object are identified with the characteristics of another.
And finally, the fantastic analogy provides for the mental representation of things as they are not really, but as we would like to see them, taking into account the fantasy.
For example, we would like the road to exist only where the wheels of cars touch it.
And so on.
In the process of the game, the members of the group, in the process of the synoptic session, the members of the group in a free manner should play each leading question of the chairman.
And catch the moment when a promising idea appears.
Develop this idea wordily until the moment when the members of the synoptic group can build a mechanism or a prototype of the device.
Unlike the methods of thinking hats and chairs, solving problems using the method of synoptics requires much more time.
It can be even several weeks at a full working day.
At the same time, part of the time is spent on discussion, and the other part is spent on practical work, building prototypes, models, and so on.
This is where we finish our discussion on the methods of decision-making.
But if we make a decision soon, it is necessary and appropriate to talk about the mistakes that managers make when making decisions.
What is the role of decision-making?
I have said many times that managers must make decisions quickly in the modern world.
And a quick decision brings a risk and the commitment to make big mistakes or frequent mistakes.
Therefore, theoreticians and practitioners in the field of management have made a good generalization,
which allows to present a list of the most typical mistakes that managers face.
Why? To help them to look at possible mistakes before the decision is made,
and to learn to make better and more effective decisions on their or someone else's mistakes.
Moreover, a mistake is a mistake.
One mistake can become a starting point for the next, sometimes even creative decision,
and some mistakes, especially at the strategic level, can irrevocably ruin the business, even a long-standing business on the market.
What are the main reasons for making a decision?
Most often, this reason is hidden in the method of their acceptance.
The options of choice, alternatives, accurate information, all advantages and disadvantages, the prediction was inaccurate, and so on, were not clearly defined.
But there is another reason why a person makes a mistake.
And it is not about the collected information or the wrong approach to the research.
Sometimes the human brain works in such a way that we simply make a wrong choice, even having enough relevant information.
In this course, we will present you with typical mistakes,
in the way they are grouped by three specialists in this field.
These are Matthias Nölke, Paul Natt and John Hammond.
Matthias Nölke calls the six most common mistakes when making a decision.
The first is that you postpone the decision.
The second is that you judge everything too hastily, as an antithesis.
The third is that you rely entirely on your feelings, that is, a completely intuitive decision.
The fourth mistake is very serious and often occurs,
that a person making a decision does not separate the main from the secondary,
and tries to decide both, and sometimes more often only the secondary.
The fifth mistake is that a person spends too much energy on making a decision.
And the sixth is that he tries to decide only the easiest decision, postponing the decision for later.
If you postpone a decision, think for yourself.
After all, many of us often postpone a decision.
I will think about it later.
Why is it that a decision is postponed most often?
First of all, a person is afraid of the risk of responsibility.
If the decision has already been made, then the mistake will have to be answered,
better postponed, maybe the matter will be resolved somehow by itself.
And another reason is that as soon as you make a decision,
all other decisions are already losing their relevance.
And some people want the horizon to be open to them.
And suddenly, in a day or two, we will find evidence that this is not the best alternative, but some other.
What consequences can postponing a decision have?
The fact is that most often in practice it happens in such a way
that the situation does not improve and the matter does not improve by itself,
but on the contrary, the conflict in the situation becomes even more complicated,
sharpened, and the time for its decision is already lost and it becomes even harder to make a decision.
Well, in the business world, there is certainly a danger, a probability,
that someone will make this decision instead of you and thus leave you behind.
What does it mean to judge a decision, to make a decision too hastily?
That is, to accept it before all the necessary and sufficient information is collected for making this decision.
When an analysis of your capabilities, resources, and so on, is done,
very often, we do not talk in this case about intuitive decision making, purely intuitive,
sometimes it is just a desire to be ahead, to take, if you want, a bull by the horns,
to take the lead over the situation so as not to be late, as in the previous case.
Unfortunately, in such cases, decisions are often lacking in foundation,
the risk of making a wrong decision increases many times,
a decision that will be difficult to explain, analyze, and so on.
And what is not unimportant, such a hasty decision makes the person who made this decision very vulnerable to manipulation.
He will not be able to prove why he made this decision,
proposed this particular action, and not another, because the strategy was practically not developed.
If, when making a decision, the manager relies only on his feelings,
then we say that he makes the decision intuitively.
The main drawback of an intuitive decision, we talked about this at the beginning of the course,
is that they cannot be rethought, analyzed, and proved to colleagues why exactly so,
and not just the way they are.
A very serious mistake is not being able to separate the main from the secondary.
Very often it is associated with the inability to structure your thinking,
to focus your attention on important points, and to leave insignificant ones aside.
A person tries to solve both of these, and as a result,
there is such an expression, in fact, the thought spreads like wildfire,
and in order to focus on the main, he lacks either skill,
or in the future, time to solve the main problem, the main reason, the primary reason.
The consequences of this are extremely sad.
Most likely, when it becomes clear that there is no longer any time to delay and investigate,
the decision will be made randomly,
and at the same time, the risk of making a wrong decision increases many times.
Since the thinking, the rethinking was not structured,
it will be very difficult to make a historical analysis of the decision,
to understand what the mistake was, and how to avoid it in the future,
if the decision is accidentally correct,
then it will be difficult to repeat it in the future due to the same reasons.
Another mistake is spending too much energy,
which is understood in this case under the expense of energy.
Partly, it may be due to the indecisiveness of a person,
or due to the mistake of postponing the problem,
and sometimes it's just a characteristic of a person who is called a perfectionist,
they want to work everything out carefully, a huge amount of information is collected,
it is carefully analyzed, a large number of specialists are attracted to critical study of the process,
in order to reduce the risk of mistakes.
On the one hand, in general, it looks probably not bad, reasonable,
but there must be moderation in everything.
Thank you.